Could you give your full name? My name is Robert G.
Tow. And this is June 1, Tuesday, 1993, at the
University of Texas, Austin Astronomy
Department. Where were you born, Bob? I was born in
Jackson, Michigan, on May 1, 1929. When did you
first get—how did you first get interested in
astronomy? Oh, there were two or three events. I
remember one event when I was extremely young, and
I have not yet been able to identify this event, but
there was a very heavy meteor shower, which we saw
when we were driving in our old Willie's Night from
Brooklyn to Jackson, Michigan, late one night.
The meteors were coming down very heavily, almost
straight down like a rainstorm. In later years, I
thought that perhaps this was the Jacobinid
shower of 1933, but I've more recently understood
that that was not seen in the United States. A more
recent event was the Jacobinid meteor shower of
1946, but by that time I was already almost through
high school and far along on my interest in
astronomy. I had a very good view of that
particular meteor shower. Where'd you go to
undergraduate school? University of Illinois.
First at Navy Pier and then down in Champaign. And
what was your major? Physics. Physics. And when
did you get your degree? Fifty-two. Okay. Then you
went to graduate school, and where did you go?
Well, I didn't go immediately to graduate school.
I went to work for a year at the with the Signal
Corps, U.S. Army, and then they drafted me, and I
worked for two more years for them. And I went to the
University of Illinois Graduate School for two
years. Got my master's degree. At that time, there
was no Ph.D. program at Illinois, and
Stan Wyatt and...
Ivan King? No, no, McVitie. McVitie. George
McVitie advised. me to try Michigan. Therefore, I
enrolled at the University of Michigan in 1957. As
I recall, when you were still at Illinois, you
already had a well-developed
ability to build instruments because you built a
plate-holding camera for the 12-inch refractor
with Well,
I discovered that there was a lathe and a
rudimentary shop in the basement of that old
observatory on the University of Illinois
campus, and certainly George McVitie didn't
discourage me from trying some things. In fact,
there was one summer when I didn't have much to do,
and he was going to be away from campus, and he
suggested, well, why don't you give that old
30-inch mirror sitting under the stairs to test. I
said, okay, I'll do it. And I went ahead and built a
very elaborate testing apparatus down in the shop
there. Then I found some space in the basement of
the physics building to set it up and do these
tests. Called a truck to come over and pick up the
mirror. It was still in its crate. I had not opened
the crate yet. They came and they backed the truck
up to the steps of the observatory whereupon the
steps collapsed down into the basement.
They
finally did get the mirror into the truck and over
to the physics building and we opened up the crate
and the mirror had a deep radial crack from its
center out about two-thirds of the way to the edge,
and therefore was essentially useless. I did
spend a few days just going through some
rudimentary tests. However, it was something
like a 30-inch F1.5 or F2. Was this the one where the
guy in Indiana was going to use it to photograph the
souls of the recently departed? That's exactly
the one. Or is it now? Well, I don't know. As far as I
know, it's still in the basement of the physics
building. What did you do for your—when did you get
your Ph.D. at Michigan? 63. And what was your
dissertation on? It was on spectrophotometry of
the nucleus—or the nuclear region of M-31. And who
was your advisor? Bill Lilly. Oh, okay. Okay, so
let's see, that was 60? 63. 63. Okay, then it's time
to look for a job. Well, okay, yeah. In 61,
Gerard de Vaucouleur and Frank Edmonds here at the
University of Texas called and invited me to spend
a few months here in Austin helping to design a
couple of astronomical instruments. I guess they
heard about me at a meeting someplace and decided
to give me a try. Well, at that stage in my graduate
studies, both I and my wife were pretty exhausted
and we decided this is a good chance to take a break.
So we spent four months here in Austin, designed a
spectrum
scanner to be used on the 82-inch telescope. And
then on the 1st of January, 70 degrees here in
Austin, we left for back home. By the time we got
there, it was zero degrees in Michigan. And we
moved back into our old environment for a few
months, finishing up graduate work in Michigan.
While I was here in Austin, Frank Edmonds and
Gerard Vogeler invited me to join the faculty here
at Texas. And when did you do that? I did that in the
fall of 62. Okay, so how many faculty were there
then? The fourth one or something like that?
Something like that, yes. There's a photograph I
think up here.
Okay, Bob Tull is now unfolding a photograph of the
five horsemen, and from left to right, they are
Harlan Smith, a very young-looking juror of the
Book of Lore, Bob Tull. Who's the other guy? This is
Frank Edmonds, of course, and this is...
The fifth man is Terry Deeming, who was here for a
few years. He was primarily a mathematician, did a
lot of theoretical work, And he eventually moved
to a mathematical firm in Houston called Digicon.
He passed away about two years ago. The faculty's a
lot bigger now. Is it any better, you think? Oh, I
believe so. There's a wide variety of interests in
the faculty at the present moment, including the
theoretical and the experimental. And
observational astronomy is very strong here at
the University of Texas. Well, when you got here,
what did you do? What have they been having you do
for the last 30 years? Well, my first seven years
here, I was on the teaching faculty.
About the third or fourth year, the University of
Texas became very active in planning and building
a new hundred and seven inch telescope, which Ron
Shorn of course was instrumental in some of that
early planning.
Harlan Smith at one stage asked me to join the the
project, which required me to drop one of my summer
research grants. And from that point on, I was
heavily involved in the construction of the
107-inch telescope, which involved the design of
the Coudet spectrograph, the testing of the
107-inch mirror at the manufacturer Davidson
Optronics in West Covina, California.
The tests were completed in 1968. The telescope
came together that year and the first observation
was done on March 9th, the night of March 8th of
1969.
was my observation, which was a high-resolution
spectrum of Arcturus.
And what did you do after the 107-inch? After the
107-inch, I became a member of the research staff
at McDonald Observatory as what was called a
research scientist. This was a relatively new
type of position for the University of Texas.
Eventually, the research staff of the McDonald
Observatory increased as much as did the faculty,
and at the present moment we have roughly equal
numbers of faculty and research scientists,
like 20 to 22 of each.
During the ensuing years, I have been involved for
part of the time in observational astronomy, but I
found long ago that my interest in
instrumentation would keep me from ever reducing
this data. And I decided eventually that it was a
waste of telescope time for me to occupy a
telescope for an observing run. and then just sit
on the data. So I gradually moved over entirely
into instrumentation. There's a fellow just like
you at the Center for Astrophysics, John Geary. Do
you know him? Oh, yes. I know John Geary. I was
drinking wine with him last morning. And you're
two guys I had in mind, because whether you're
planetary astronomers or scholar astronomers or
what, we all use your stuff. And I don't think you
guys get enough credit. Do you think you get enough
credit? No, I don't.
Well, I enjoy my work very much. You did a fair
amount of work on the late, lamented 300-inch,
Texas 300-inch. Yes, I did. I was the principal
scientist, project scientist for that project.
How many years did that take off your life? That was
five years. Five years. Are you connected in any
way with the SST, the Spectroscopic Survey
Telescope? I've been asked to and I've begun doing
the work to design, to oversee the design and
construction of the high resolution
spectrograph for the SST. I began that effort last
fall with an
international conference which I organized and
which was held entirely by email. has involved not
only the international partners of the SST
project, but a number of other observatories
where I knew that there were high-resolution
spectroscopists and people involved in the
construction of high-resolution spectros. Let
me ask you a historical question. If you held this
conference entirely by email, were there any
records kept of what went back Everything was
automatically recorded in real time. I have all
those records, both in my computer records and in
hard copy. I have not otherwise published the
records. I have simply made it known that those
records are in my computer files and accessible to
people locally and have let people know by word of
mouth that they are available. Now, you're in an
interesting position because you've done some
work in planetary astronomy, but you're not
really a planetary astronomer, so you have kind of
an inside-outside view. Yeah, that's right. Do
you think planetary astronomers are looked down
upon by real astronomers? Oh, to some extent, I
know that's true. Yes. Well, of course, it's
really hard to talk about how the 107-inch was
viewed here in Texas, because it was a small
department, so you really couldn't have big
factions.
But when the idea of taking money from NASA to build
a telescope that would spend a large amount of time
working on other planets Was that well received
here by the staff and also by the administration of
the university as far as you know? Well, as far as I
know, yes. As you implied, the staff, the faculty
was quite small at the time that we began the
project. There were some members of the faculty
who did not participate actively and so far as I'm
aware, have never actually used the telescope
since it was built. And as far as I'm, that has been
the only
hint I have, I think, that there is anyone who felt
that it was not a proper project to carry out. I'm
skipping around a bit here, but Do you get requests
from people to design things, or do you get an idea
and say, hey, why don't we build this or design this
or something, or is it a combination of both?
Not very many such requests from outside. Of
course, Harlan Smith is a great source of ideas.
would often ask, well, wouldn't it be a good idea to
do this? And I think more than most cases, more than
half the cases, I would say no. But there were
certainly those cases where I said yes. And Harlan
Smith was always my strongest supporter in
instrumentation. deeply my interests in the
reticon development and in the intensified
reticon, which we called the self-scanned
digicon. He made the original suggestion
concerning the construction of the octicon,
which was, it doesn't exist anymore, but at the
time that we built it, it was an array of eight
linear reticon arrays butted end to end along the
photographic plate holder, effectively, of the
40 inch diameter, 1.8
meter focal length camera of the Kudai
spectrograph. That was completed in 1984. We
retired it. Let me clarify a point. It was built,
and the NSF supported it, for the specific purpose
to be an interim instrument until large format
CCDs should become readily available. And it
served that purpose at the time that the Tektronix
CCD 2048 by 2048 CCD came close to being available,
we retired it as we built the instrument that has
now replaced it, which we call 2D Kudeng.
You mentioned that Harlan was always a strong
supporter of yours, and obviously he's one guy I
can't interview.
Tell me about Harlan.
Well, Harlan came here with strong support from
the University of Chicago staff, in particular in
63, which was the couple of years after I came. He
came here already with ideas of expanding this
department and building a much larger telescope,
or at least a telescope equal to the 82-inch
telescope. He, it was his vision that eventually
we would have a staff of something like 20
faculty members and a group of something like 50
graduate students. At the time this sounded like
an idle dream, but in fact it was not. That is where
we are now. And it was indeed Harlan's drive that
brought this about.
He did bring in the NASA funding for the 107-inch
telescope in the mid-'60s, and we constructed
that telescope and completed it in early 1969.
Basically, that was Harlan's telescope. Didn't
that come in over budget?
I left headquarters by then to go back. I don't know
any project that doesn't come in over budget to
some extent. To
go back to your instrumentation life again, once
you design something like a reticon or something
and it's done and built, is there usually much
interaction with the people that use it? You know,
coming back and saying, look Bob, you can turn it 90
degrees or something like this, or does it just go
off into a black hole? My instrument would be a
total failure if it weren't for that type of
interaction. If an instrument, for example, is
not used to begin with by the observing
astronomers, then it might not as well have ever
been built. In my case, I've had very excellent
relationships with observing astronomers. We
have worked together in developing the
instruments. We have worked together in
developing the methods of using them. And I think
we kind of continue to see future development
together.
Now to go back to Harlan again. Do you think he might
have done even more had he done a little less? Would
you mind rephrasing the question? If he would have
stopped and taken a breath once in a while.
There were times
increasingly toward the end of his career when he
met resistance to all that drive that he had. The
administration of the university was becoming
increasingly strapped for state funds over the
past dozen years or so. And Harlan Smith
refused to allow that to slow him down.
Requests that he made to the administration back
in the early days, such as when the 170th was being
built, were met, I think, much more eagerly than
they were in later days when there simply wasn't
that much of a margin between requests and the
wherewithal to support them.
I'm not sure that he could have done any more than he
did whether he slowed down or speeded up in his
drive. As you're well aware, one of his dreams was
astronomy from the surface of the moon. And I don't
know where that idea is going to go, and I don't know
whether there would have been a better or worse
chance for that ever to happen had he not passed
away. Well,
let's start with your case. But anyway, most
astronomy departments are replete with
backstabbing. Did Harlan, I mean, and this place
is actually fairly well known, justly or
unjustly, for not really being that bad in that
respect. Did Harlan help with that or hinder or
didn't make any difference? because there were
all these guys here. One of Harlan's outstanding
qualities was support of his people.
I have never heard him degrade any of the research
or faculty people here.
He has supported people who, it's probably the
opinion of most people around here, didn't
deserve support. Are we talking a group of all in
this, too? Well, yes, that's one.
I'm thinking specifically of the young man, Jack
Hyde, who shot the bullet holes in the 170-inch
primary mirror back in, what was it, 69 or 70.
Harlan gave him a great deal of support
afterwards. That, I think, amazed everybody.
I understand that the man's wife also supported
him greatly, and that eventually he was worked
himself into a much more comfortable position in
life, but at the time things looked
grim. What piece of work, if you've turned out, do
you think was your best? You know, we're going to
chisel something out of your tombstone. Oh, I
suppose it would be the Kudai spectrograph and the
107-inch telescope. I have to qualify that to some
extent in that that particular project, as true of
a number of projects, wasn't the type of thing you
do and then it's finished. I designed the
spectrograph, we got it built as part of the
107-inch construction project,
Well, my design of it was the optical design. The
mechanical design was done by with a lot of
preliminary work here by our engineers. So there
were a lot of people involved in it. But it got
installed, and we started using it
photographically. And then we immediately built
a scanner for it that very same year, which was in
operation within three months of the completion
of the telescope. It has been that way ever since.
It still is a project. It is a continuing project.
And I've been involved with it, and nobody has told
me to stop. So I simply continue to allow it to grow
and evolve. try to keep up with the times. There
have been one difficulty with
technology probably in general is that if you stop
at a given time and adopt what's available at that
time, it's very difficult to evolve away from that
particular development in view of further, even
better developments after that and one tends to
find oneself with obsolete equipment within a few
years. I've attempted to alleviate that as much as
possible by trying to go on to the next step. And one
of those examples is the fact that we did build
Opticon at a time when there wasn't a clear
direction toward getting very large array CCDs,
and we gladly retired it when it was time to replace
it with the next step up. Are the detectors pretty
much all CCDs now? Yes, they're virtually all CCDs
now. The scanner, in fact, is still in place. and is
occasionally used for scanning, say,
transmission profiles of interference filters,
which makes it probably the best spectrograph in
the world for that particular application. It
sure is.
So you have in the past taken N-ASA money.
Did you have any problems with them? Or did they
come through pretty well? Or did they try and tell
you what to do too much? Well,
I don't believe that I've ever directly requested
a grant from NASA. I have worked within the overall
planetary grant of the McDonald Observatory. and
have made my requests through that grant.
I have been quite pleased with the
support of NASA for my instrumentation project
here. Have you had any NSF support? Yes. And how
does that compare?
My
NSFs are, well, I've...
I mean, are they freer with their money or let you do
more what you want? There are times when I feel that
NSF is freer with the money. There are times when I
feel that that NASA, for whatever reason, perhaps
it's individuals who happened to be in the office
at that time,
are rather more pessimistic about what I can do, or
what anybody can do, particularly in
ground-based astronomy, than the view that I get
from NSF.
What do... What do people, what is the reaction,
the reactions of people that you meet when you tell
them what you do for a living? Do they think it's
neat? Do they think you're a parasite or what? I
haven't heard much reference to parasitism at
all. You're speaking, I presume, of people
outside of strength. Yeah, right. I've always had
the greatest respect from people with whom I've
discussed these things. Mike Belton got called
that by a plumber, so I know it exists. This again is
personal opinion, but I'm building up personal
opinions, a file of them. Do you think astronomy
has sold itself well, has done a good job of selling
itself to the public? I think it has, apparently
so.
I suppose I could sound a little bit brash to say
that I think we've done it very well here in Texas
through our Stardate program, for example, our
overall public outreach program, which I think is
an exceptionally good one. It has been very
effective. I can't give you numbers now, but every
year we have more and more visitors at McDonald
Observatory.
It's my understanding that some observatories
restrict visitors quite a bit, and that had never
been
the philosophy of McDonald Observatory. We have a
visitor's center with a well-equipped staff.
associated directly with the visitors program
which is also running the Stardate radio program
and the Stardate magazine.
The public response to this has been extremely
good.
I had occasion to visit the observatory over the
Easter weekend with my grandson's Boy Scout
troop. And we attended the public night at the
observatory and the place was essentially packed
with the public. They are all there, eager and
anxious to stand out there in the cold under the
stars and have somebody point out
constellations.